---
layout: post
title:  "Writing a Shell, Part 1"
date:   2019-06-25 09:12:00 +0200
categories: shell
permalink: /shell/part_01
---

# What Is a Shell
According to [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shell_(computing)), the term *shell* is used in computer science to name a **user interface for access to an operating system's services**. You can think of it as the one user-space program that is closest to the operating system. The OS runs in kernel mode and can do a lot of things a regular user cannot do, but with a shell we can at least have a share of its power! While the operating system handles a computer's resources (like *memory*, *CPU usage*, *I/O devices*, and much more), the shell let's you access the most minimal abstraction layer that the kernel thinks save enough for a user to have access to. While in a graphical file manager, you might drag and drop files around to move them between directories, in a shell you are pretty much directly invoking routines called *system calls* to manipulate the state of a file system. There is still a level of protection against user mistakes, but far less than you have with most GUI applications.
<br>
In addition to managing files, a shell allows for the creating of *processes*, the execution unit of a program. Although they are complex to understand in detail, you can practically think of them as a running instance of a program. While the operating system handles the actual create and termination of a process as well as running it on an available CPU of your computer, a shell can be used to ask the OS to create a new process. This is actually the very first, fundamental building block of a shell's code as we will see.
<br>
There are many more things shells can do though. They are typically used to do system administration tasks, i.e. configuring the operating system, services and daemons. And on **Unix**-like systems, they have very powerful scripting capabilities built into them which makes them highly useful in automatizing repetitive tasks. Learning about *shell scripting* should be on every **Unix** users to-do list, really!
<br>
As a short disclaimer, the above introduction to shells is probably not enough to fully understand their importance and use-cases. If you haven't used a shell before or very little, you should go ahead and read about shell *usage* before you continue reading about shell *writing*. On Linux, there are many, many different shells at this point. No list will be provided, though. Just click this [Wikipedia link](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_command_shells).
<br>
From this point onwards, only *Unix*-derived systems like Linux or a BSD variant will be considered. They should all work pretty much the same (look at the function's **man** pages if something doesn't go as smoothly as it should; you *will* find *all* answers there!).

# Prerequisites
This is meant to be for beginners, so no extensive system's programming knowledge is required. An ability to read (and ideally, write) C code and to use a system's documentation will be very helpful, though. As was said above, experience with using a shell will actually help a lot to understand what we are actually implementing here.

# The Basic Principle
This will be a quick project! Everything we need to do is get an input line from *stdin*, parse it into an array with whitespaces (and probably tabs) as delimiters, create a new process, and pass the arguments into a function that executes them for us. The function that does that is `exec(3)` and it comes in a variety of flavors (read the manual! we will use `execve(3)` but they all have their use-cases).

```bash
# the user starts the shell like every other program from an existing
# shell prompt (e.g. the system's login shell)
$ ./c_shell # prompt of another shell, executing our shell
>           # our shell's prompt (it will actually be nicer)
> ls -a     # a command typed at our shell's prompt
# parsing returns something like ["ls", "-a"]
# a new process is created: create_new_process()
# and the parsing result is executed: exec(["ls", "-a"])
```

The only thing we'll have to do is to wait for `exec(3)` to finish. We probably want to check for success or failure, too. And that's it! If we do this in a loop (i.e., print a prompt again after `exec(3)` finished), we have a working shell prompt that we can use to talk to the kernel of our OS. There are obviously a lot of details that were just skipped in this description and many more things have to be implemented for a shell to function properly. This includes so-called *builtins*,
functions that the shell recognizes as special and which make it perform a certain action like changing the current working directory. But don't worry about all this. In the next post, we will walk through the C code of the minimal shell that was described above, so be excited!
